mericas, or America,[5][6][7] also known
 as the New World, ar
e the combined continental landmasses of North America and 
South America,[8][9] in the Western Hemisphere.[10] 
Along with their associated islands, they co
v
er 8.3% of the Earth's total surf
ace area (28.4% of its land area). The topography is dominate
d by the American Cordillera, a l
ong chain of mountains that run the
 length of the west coast. The
 flatter eastern side of the Americas is dominated by large river basins, such as the 
Amazon, Mississippi, and La Plata. Since the Americas extend 14,000 km (8
,700 mi) from north to south, the climate and ecology vary widely, from the arctic tundra of Northern Canad
a, Greenland, and
 Alaska, to the tropical rain forests in Central America and South America.

Humans first settled the Americas from Asia between 40,000 BCE and 15,000 BCE. A second migratio
n of Na-Dene speakers followed later from Asia. The subsequent migration of the Inuit into the
 neoarctic around 3500 BCE completed what is generally regarded
 as the settlement by the indigenous peoples of the Americas. The first known European settlement in t
he Americas was by the Norse explorer Leif Ericson.[11] However
 the colonization never became permanent an
d was later abandoned. The voyages of Christopher Columbus from 1492 to 1502 
resulted in permanent contact with European (and subsequently,
 other Old World) powers, which led to the Columbian exchange. 
Diseases introduced from Europe and Africa devastated the Indigenous 
peoples, and the European powers colonised the Americas.[12] 
Mass emigration from Europe, including large numbers of 
indentured servants, and forced immigration of African slaves 
largely replaced the Indigenous Peoples. Beginning with the 
American Revolution in 1776 and Haitian Revolution in 1791, 
the European powers began to decolonise the Americas. 
Currently, almost all of the population of 
the Americas resides in independent countries; however, the legacy of the colonisation and 
settlement by Europeans is that the Americas share many common cultural traits, most notably
 Christianity and the use of Indo-European languages; primarily Spanish, 
English, and Portuguese. More than 900 million people live in the Americas 
(about 13.5% of the human population), the most populous countries being the 
United States, Brazil, and Mexico, the most populous cities being São Paulo, Mexico City and New York City.
